README.md, before:

# BastionKeyClient
Client for automatically managing SSH keys in bastion hosts

## Requirements.

Python 3.9+, Ansible 5.1.0+ (script package will install Ansible as a dependency), Vagrant (for testing)

## Principle of operation
The script is designed to be run as a cron job/systemd timer from every bastion host, periodically interrogating
UIS/CoreAPI `bastionkeys` endpoint for new and expired bastion SSH keys. 
It then uses [Ansible](bastion_key_client/ansible/README.md) to update ~/.ssh/authorized_keys file for each
user whose key has changed, creating user accounts if necessary. 
In addition to avoid stale keys it checks the comments on the keys which have
their expiration date encoded as `..._(2021-11-11 11:11:11+0000)_` and expires/removes those as well.

UIS/CoreAPI provides the keys including the comment-encoded expiration date, login and full name of
each affected user as part of the return of the `bastionkeys_get` endpoint. 

The script saves the last time it ran as UTC timestamp in a file and uses that as a parameter in the next
invocation. If no file exists it uses a preconfigured _backoff_ period to scan for keys. 

The script can reach into any home directory avoiding those that are
specified on a special exclude list as part of its configuration. 
It is assumed accounts listed there do not require automatic key rotation via UIS. 

In addition the script uses a `prejudice` setting to decide how to deal with keys found in ~/.ssh/authorized_keys
that do not have expiration timestamps in the comments. If True, those keys are removed when they are found,
if False they are left alone. 

Formally, the script runs in stages:

1. Execute a call against `bastionkeys_get` and get a list of new and expired keys
2. Collect all new keys and user accounts
3. Scan allowed home directories for expired keys and build a list of keys that need to be expired by appending to 
the list of expired keys received from UIS/CoreAPI
4. Create a single configuration file for the Ansible role with accounts and keys
to be added and removed
5. Execute the ansible playbook to affect the changes

## Design, packaging, permissions and deployment considerations

While it is possible to design the script to run fully remotely, it is more efficient
to have it run locally, since it needs to scan the contents of multiple 
/home/.../.ssh/authorized_keys files on the bastion host itself (in Stage 3).

Since the script must modify the state of the bastion host's /etc/passwd, /etc/group and 
/home/.../.ssh/authorized_keys, it runs native to the bastion host (not in a container).
The script does not run on the root account. The script runs with sufficient privilege to
see/modify inside /home/.../.ssh/authorized_keys of all accounts and is able to sudo via 
[Ansible](bastion_key_client/ansible/README.md) playbooks to modify create new accounts. 

It is assumed that Python3, Ansible (built-in and posix packages) are installed and available
to the user executing the script (Ansible is installed as a dependency).

## Directory Structure and Dev Installation

Drop auto-generated clients from swagger directly into top directory (so they end up in
`python-client-generated` folder). Update `python-client-generated/setup.py`
so it installs as its own separate package. 

Pushing to PyPi is separated for the auto-generated swagger client and for the Bastion Key Client itself. 
To push updated swagger client:
```shell
$ cd python-client-generated
$ rm dist/*
$ python setup.py bdist_wheel
$ twine upload dist/*
```
(when updating swagger client, be sure to preserve/update `python-client-generated/setup.py` as it is not default)

Use `pip install python-client-generated/` for development, otherwise install as dependency from PyPi as 
`pip install bastion-key-swagger-client`. 

To push Bastion Key Client to PyPi, do
```shell
$ rm dist/*
$ python setup.py sdist bdist_wheel
$ twine upload dist/*
```
from the top level directory

## Production installation and invocation

Since the script must be executed as sudo, it is recommended that both the script package and ansible are 
installed via sudo:
```bash
$ sudo pip3 install ansible
$ sudo pip3 install bastion-key-client
```

It is recommended that `/usr/local/bin` is added to `secure_path` in `/etc/sudoers/` or else the script
is symlinked to `/usr/bin`. The script can then be invoked (using absolute paths, after creating appropriate
configuration files):
```
$ sudo /usr/local/bin/update_bastion_keys.py -c /home/vagrant/bastion-env
```

## Configuration

The behavior of the script is configured largely via a `.env` file (formatted as a set of Bash
variable assignments). The filename is assumed to be `.env` unless `-c` option is used. The
following parameters can be specified:

| Parameter name | (M)andatory or (O)ptional| Default value | Notes |
|--- |--- |--- | --- | 
| UIS_HOST_URL | O | https://127.0.0.1:8443/ |
| UIS_HOST_SSL_VALIDATE | O | True | Warnings from urllib will be printed if `False` |
| UIS_API_SECRET | M |  | 
| TIMESTAMP_FILE | O | /tmp/bastion-timestamp |
| LOCK_FILE | O | /tmp/bastion-timestamp.lock |
| LOG_FILE | O | stdout | Can be 'stdout' or a file name | 
| EXTRA_VARS_FILE | O | /tmp/bastion-users.json | File to which --extra-vars (account and key information) of the Ansible role are saved prior to execution. Normally deleted after completion. |
| BACKOFF_PERIOD | O | 1440 | In minutes | 
| EXCLUDE_LIST_FILE | M | | Exclude home directories of these users (white space separated). To serve as a reminder, no default is provided, script exits with an error if not specified. |
| HOME_PREFIX | O | /home |
| WITH_PREJUDICE | O | False | If `True` remove keys that don't have a timestamp |

## Logging

Logging from the script can be set to go to `stdout` (default configuration) or set LOG_FILE configuration
variable to an absolute path of the log file (see Configuration section). 

If using `-d` debug option, `stdout` is always used for logging and LOG_FILE setting is ignored.

In addition the built-in ansible role has a ansibgle.cfg file that sets log path to `/tmp/bastion-ansible.log`.
You can change this configuration on an already deployed system by editing this file typically located
some place like `/usr/local/lib/python3.9/site-packages/bastion_key_client/ansible/fabric-bastion/ansible.cfg`.

## Deployment and Testing

### Local testing for development

Easiest to spin up a Vagrant VM with CentOS 8 or whatever appropriate, make sure Python3.9+
and Ansible 2.12+ are installed on it (Ansible is installed as a dependency by pip). 
The [Vagrantfile](vagrant/centos8/Vagrantfile) automates the example installation.

Some example files:

ansible.cfg 
```ini
[defaults]
deprecation_warnings=False
```
Test playbook
```yaml
- name: update apache locally
  hosts: localhost
  connection: local
  become: yes
  tasks:
  - name: update apache
    ansible.builtin.yum:
      name: httpd
      state: latest
```
Install the script on the Vagrant host via pip, then configure it to talk to some
instance of UIS (including in DOM0, since the Vagrant setup sets up a private network).

Create a `.env` configuration file and execute manually or via cron/systemd timer.

Commit message:

Updates for cron job deployments

README.md, after:

# BastionKeyClient
Client for automatically managing SSH keys in bastion hosts

## Requirements.

Python 3.9+, Ansible 5.1.0+ (script package will install Ansible as a dependency), Vagrant (for testing)

## Principle of operation
The script is designed to be run as a cron job/systemd timer from every bastion host, periodically interrogating
UIS/CoreAPI `bastionkeys` endpoint for new and expired bastion SSH keys. 
It then uses [Ansible](bastion_key_client/ansible/README.md) to update ~/.ssh/authorized_keys file for each
user whose key has changed, creating user accounts if necessary. 
In addition to avoid stale keys it checks the comments on the keys which have
their expiration date encoded as `..._(2021-11-11 11:11:11+0000)_` and expires/removes those as well.

UIS/CoreAPI provides the keys including the comment-encoded expiration date, login and full name of
each affected user as part of the return of the `bastionkeys_get` endpoint. 

The script saves the last time it ran as UTC timestamp in a file and uses that as a parameter in the next
invocation. If no file exists it uses a preconfigured _backoff_ period to scan for keys. 

The script can reach into any home directory avoiding those that are
specified on a special exclude list as part of its configuration. 
It is assumed accounts listed there do not require automatic key rotation via UIS. 

In addition the script uses a `prejudice` setting to decide how to deal with keys found in ~/.ssh/authorized_keys
that do not have expiration timestamps in the comments. If True, those keys are removed when they are found,
if False they are left alone. 

Formally, the script runs in stages:

1. Execute a call against `bastionkeys_get` and get a list of new and expired keys
2. Collect all new keys and user accounts
3. Scan allowed home directories for expired keys and build a list of keys that need to be expired by appending to 
the list of expired keys received from UIS/CoreAPI
4. Create a single configuration file for the Ansible role with accounts and keys
to be added and removed
5. Execute the ansible playbook to affect the changes

## Design, packaging, permissions and deployment considerations

While it is possible to design the script to run fully remotely, it is more efficient
to have it run locally, since it needs to scan the contents of multiple 
/home/.../.ssh/authorized_keys files on the bastion host itself (in Stage 3).

Since the script must modify the state of the bastion host's /etc/passwd, /etc/group and 
/home/.../.ssh/authorized_keys, it runs native to the bastion host (not in a container).
The script does not run on the root account. The script runs with sufficient privilege to
see/modify inside /home/.../.ssh/authorized_keys of all accounts and is able to sudo via 
[Ansible](bastion_key_client/ansible/README.md) playbooks to modify create new accounts. 

It is assumed that Python3, Ansible (built-in and posix packages) are installed and available
to the user executing the script (Ansible is installed as a dependency).

## Directory Structure and Dev Installation

Drop auto-generated clients from swagger directly into top directory (so they end up in
`python-client-generated` folder). Update `python-client-generated/setup.py`
so it installs as its own separate package. 

Pushing to PyPi is separated for the auto-generated swagger client and for the Bastion Key Client itself. 
To push updated swagger client:
```shell
$ cd python-client-generated
$ rm dist/*
$ python setup.py bdist_wheel
$ twine upload dist/*
```
(when updating swagger client, be sure to preserve/update `python-client-generated/setup.py` as it is not default)

Use `pip install python-client-generated/` for development, otherwise install as dependency from PyPi as 
`pip install bastion-key-swagger-client`. 

To push Bastion Key Client to PyPi, do
```shell
$ rm dist/*
$ python setup.py sdist bdist_wheel
$ twine upload dist/*
```
from the top level directory

## Production installation and invocation

Since the script must be executed as sudo, it is recommended that both the script package and ansible are 
installed via sudo:
```bash
$ sudo pip3 install ansible
$ sudo pip3 install bastion-key-client
```

If deploying as non root, it is recommended that `/usr/local/bin` is added to `secure_path` in `/etc/sudoers/` 
or else the script is symlinked to `/usr/bin` (a more secure approach). The script can then be invoked 
(using absolute paths, after creating appropriate configuration files):
```
$ sudo /usr/local/bin/update_bastion_keys.py -c /home/vagrant/bastion-env
```
For crontab deployment, remember that cron jobs have no access to environment variables, including PATH
so be sure to add /usr/local/bin to PATH for crontab configuration:
```
PATH=/bin:/sbin/:/usr/bin:/usr/sbin:/usr/local/bin
* * * * * /usr/local/bin/update_bastion_keys.py -c /root/.update_bastion_keys.env
```

## Configuration

The behavior of the script is configured largely via a `.env` file (formatted as a set of Bash
variable assignments). The filename is assumed to be `.env` unless `-c` option is used. The
following parameters can be specified:

| Parameter name | (M)andatory or (O)ptional| Default value | Notes |
|--- |--- |--- | --- | 
| UIS_HOST_URL | O | https://127.0.0.1:8443/ |
| UIS_HOST_SSL_VALIDATE | O | True | Warnings from urllib will be printed if `False` |
| UIS_API_SECRET | M |  | 
| TIMESTAMP_FILE | O | /tmp/bastion-timestamp |
| LOCK_FILE | O | /tmp/bastion-timestamp.lock |
| LOG_FILE | O | stdout | Can be 'stdout' or a file name | 
| EXTRA_VARS_FILE | O | /tmp/bastion-users.json | File to which --extra-vars (account and key information) of the Ansible role are saved prior to execution. Normally deleted after completion. |
| BACKOFF_PERIOD | O | 1440 | In minutes | 
| EXCLUDE_LIST_FILE | M | | Exclude home directories of these users (white space separated). To serve as a reminder, no default is provided, script exits with an error if not specified. |
| HOME_PREFIX | O | /home |
| WITH_PREJUDICE | O | False | If `True` remove keys that don't have a timestamp |

## Logging

Logging from the script can be set to go to `stdout` (default configuration) or set LOG_FILE configuration
variable to an absolute path of the log file (see Configuration section). 

If using `-d` debug option, `stdout` is always used for logging and LOG_FILE setting is ignored.

In addition the built-in ansible role has a ansibgle.cfg file that sets log path to `/tmp/bastion-ansible.log`.
You can change this configuration on an already deployed system by editing this file typically located
some place like `/usr/local/lib/python3.9/site-packages/bastion_key_client/ansible/fabric-bastion/ansible.cfg`.

## Deployment and Testing

### Local testing for development

Easiest to spin up a Vagrant VM with CentOS 8 or whatever appropriate, make sure Python3.9+
and Ansible 2.12+ are installed on it (Ansible is installed as a dependency by pip). 
The [Vagrantfile](vagrant/centos8/Vagrantfile) automates the example installation.

Some example files:

ansible.cfg 
```ini
[defaults]
deprecation_warnings=False
```
Test playbook
```yaml
- name: update apache locally
  hosts: localhost
  connection: local
  become: yes
  tasks:
  - name: update apache
    ansible.builtin.yum:
      name: httpd
      state: latest
```
Install the script on the Vagrant host via pip, then configure it to talk to some
instance of UIS (including in DOM0, since the Vagrant setup sets up a private network).

Create a `.env` configuration file and execute manually or via cron/systemd timer.
